The way I always like to think about it.
This is one of my favorite talks
that I've given maybe once or
twice in the past is something I
called The Golden Age of Marketing.
I remember 20 years ago,
again this is my pre-Dupont days.
This is when I was a college student
working in a marketing firm doing
telemarketing.
So we were calling people on the phone,
and we're record the conversations.
And we'd measure whether they'd respond,
or even pick up the phone.
And we'd collect this database
of what we knew about people.
And we thought man, oh man.
Imagine how far technology's come.
Now we get to know,
we get to record the people.
We could code what they've said.
We thought we had great data.
Well, if you went to a firm today and
said, hey, I've got good news for
you, this is what you know
about your customers.
If you remember stage one of what I
talked about, phase one is the data.
If you took the data from 20 years ago and
that was your data today,
you should be fired.
It's not the best data today, and again,
when I wanna speak about the next five or
so minutes, is that there's
always better data out there, but
don't get paralyzed by this idea
of waiting for the perfect data.
Because I always like to say
the perfect data is never coming.
You have to analyse the data you have, but
don't throw away data
you could be collecting.
So again, technology is what's driven our
ability to collect data better and better.
So again, just as a brief
outline I'm gonna first give you
kind of a historical data in marketing.
So what are the kinds,
thinking back to my five step program,
what are the kinds of datasets that
are available in marketing today?
Second, what are the most emerging
datasets in marketing today.
And so, many of these will shock
you cuz I think if I told you
Google has amazing data you'd be like,
of course.
Amazon, of course.
There are lots of companies you haven't
thought about that have amazing
data today.
Then I wanna talk to you about
some really futuristic data,
like mobile data, path data,
like where you are.
So imagine a company knows
not just what you've done but
where you are physically
standing when you did it.
Another one that I've spent a lot of time
working on recently is eye tracking data.
So imagine a firm can know
not only what you bought or
what products you didn't buy, but
what you looked at and didn't look at, and
we'll be talking about that in detail.
Next, predictive analytics.
And this is kind of the third,
and the fourth parts, and
the fifth parts of my framework where
I'm gonna talk to you about real firms
that are doing real projects and
real predictive problems using analytics.
And for the part that might shock and
amaze you is every example
I'm gonna show you at the end today is
not only real, but it's being done today.
These aren't like 20/50
they're gonna launch this,
they're actually using these today.
So if you think about the outline
that I've just presented to you,
the first two parts talk about kind of,
if you'd like, step one of what I
talked about in my introduction,
which is what are the kinds of datasets
that are out there in marketing today?
So hopefully for many of you watching and
listening to this,
you can think, hey,
I could collect that kind of data.
Why don't I reap the benefits
of this great data?
Kinda part three will be talking about
what are kind of, if you'd like,
futuristic datasets and
how those could be used.
And part four, will be the application
of these by large firms today.
So if we were sitting, I'll just
briefly give you a history lesson,
you probably didn't think you're
gonna sign up for a Coursera course
from the Wharton School on Marketing and
Analytics and get a history lesson.
But I'm gonna give you a brief history
lesson of marketing in the 1950s and
in the 1950s, if you like,
the golden age of data in the 1950s was,
I would know what was
happening at each store.
Now many of you may be sitting in jobs
today, where store level data is the kind
of data you have, in other words,
that's the level of granularity you have.
Now, let me say the good news.
The good news is many firms make
decisions at the store level.
What prices should I charge in this store,
what should I put on
the end cap in this store?
What assortments should
I have in this store?
And if that's the level of decision
making you have, then store level data,
even though it's 60, 70 years old could
be fine for the decisions you have, but
it doesn't allow you to
do customer analytics.
Again, in the 1950s, the kind of
business questions you can answer was
how do store level prices relate to sales?
So imagine building a regression model
which was talked about in the earlier
modules here on analytics, where if you
have sales as your outcome variable and
prices as your input variables.
Imagine building a regression trying
to predict sales from prices.
Now if you have data at
the store level on prices,
you can start thinking
about optimizing prices.
What's the effectiveness of coupons?
So you can imagine knowing in each store
how many coupons are redeemed at a given
product category.
And trying to understand
how much is bought.
You could try to understand regional or
geographic differences.
You could also understand the effect
of in-store promotion, but
understand, these are all relevant
questions in 2015 and beyond.
But in the 1950s,
cuz the data was at the store level,
you couldn't do customer level analytics,
you could do store level analytics.
And for many of you,
this still might be the relevant problem.
My interest and my suggestion to you is,
push your firm towards collecting
greater granular data, and move from store
level analytics to customer analytics.
And again, this still leaves
a lot of money on the table.
And the reason again is, making decisions
at the customer level versus the store
level, there's a big difference in the way
that you can monetize your data that way.
In the 1960s and 70s,
kind of I say direct mail ruled the earth.
And I say this with the greatest of
fondness because most marketing analytics,
business analytics today, actually comes
out of the direct mail literature.
So when I was a child growing up in
the 70s, you would get sent your home,
I remember my parents would be sent
these types of mailers and flyers.
And of course, the company knew which
mailers and flyers they sent you.
As a matter of fact,
they could vary it household by household
depending on what you bought in the past.
If you'd like,
direct mailing in the 60s and
70s was the beginning of customer, or
if you'd like household level analytics.
They knew what you bought.
They could control which flyer, or
which brochure, or catalog to send you.
So they could do target
marketing if you'd like.
They'd know your reaction to it.
They could run an experiment, which was
talked about in the previous modules,
when they could randomly assign different
households to receive different things.
And they could see the impact.
Now of course, the downside of it
is they know what they sent you for
this type of advertising,
but not other advertising.
And they don't know what you
bought outside of their firm.
So kind of the new answerable business
questions in the 60s and 70s was,
now you could relate prices,
individual-level prices to category and
shopping behavior, but again all they
would know is the prices in their catalog.
They could to try to measure
the impact of frequency and
timing of catalogs on purchase behavior.
So think about that.
That was done in the 60s and 70s, think
about how relevant that still is today.
A firm is sending out emails.
What frequency should
they send them out with?
What timing?
Like should they send them one day apart,
three days apart, five days apart?
All of this comes from
the direct mail literature.
Product assortment, maybe you send
the Bradle household, the thin catalog and
you maybe send his neighbor
the thick catalog.
So how does the assortment you
send people affect what they buy?
And then finally, the type of advertising,
one of the beautiful things about customer
or household level analytics, is you could
test different advertising messages.
You could even test, should you have a red
background versus a blue background,
should you have 16 point
font versus a 10 point font.
One of my greatest quotes that I've
ever heard of all times was from one
of my colleagues in the marketing
department here Jerry Wind.
He said, only run experiments
if you want to know the answer.
And so, to me direct mail from the 60s and
70s laid out the five
point plan I talked about.
They knew the kind of business
questions they wanted to answer.
They knew that they could measure things
at the individual household level,
at least what they sent to you.
They knew they could vary things.
They knew they could build models.
They knew they could target people, and
they could make make business
decisions on the basis of it.
Now, of course, it leaves still a lot of
money on the table because they would know
what you bought in their catalog, but
they wouldn't know what you bought at your
grocery store,
what you bought at a big department store.
All they would know was their vertical,
what did you buy at their.
So they didn't even know what
you bought at your competitors.
So things like dollar wallet share,
which are so
important in customer lifetime value,
they wouldn't know.
Now let's think about the 1980s.
This was kind of what most people
consider modern marketing science, and
the reason is because store scanners came.
So we're all used to that today, but
I remember a day when store
scanners didn't exist.
So, you didn't go to a checkout
counter at a supermarket or
store and everything was scanned.
That wasn't the way it used to be.
And so, except for
what's called diary panel data,
you really didn't know what
individuals households bought.
Now of course,
you have the most granular data.
And again,
it's industry vertical agnostic.
Clothing stores have this.
Sporting goods stores have this.
Supermarkets have this.
Everybody can track individual level data.
Now the beauty also is, let me relate
this to two other very important topics,
which is number one, loyalty programs.
So, customers always think that loyalty
programs benefit them, and they do.
But remember, the minute you show
your loyalty card at a supermarket,
they know it's you, or the minute you pay
with your credit card, they know it's you.
So now, they can create what's
called a panel dataset,
where they're able to
measure you over time,
which means they can do target marketing
for you over, towards you over time.
So one of the things I always
talk about is loyalty programs,
credit card data, etc.
While you see it as a customer benefit,
and it definitely is, there's no
question it benefits the firm cuz now they
can do customer analytics towards you.
Because if you paid with cash every
time you went to the supermarket.
How would they know it's you.
They don't know it's you.
You're paying with cash.
They know what somebody bought but
they don't know it's you.
The key to customer analytics
is linking behaviors over time.
The scanners in the 1980s
allowed the beginning of this.
So again, the 1980s is the beginning
of the modern age of marketing because
number one, you could distribute
discounts at checkout.
You could track customers over time.
You could give people coupons, as a matter
of fact, that's still done today.
A very well-known firm, Catalina, is kind
of the master in giving out coupons.
That I buy Pampers diapers,
they give me a discount for Huggies, etc.
And again, it gives me greater
knowledge of the in-store experience.
Now again, this is great data but
it's still not the golden age of data.
So imagine you had that data today,
you'd be missing one big piece and
that's what I wanna talk about for
the 90s and 2000s and
that's lead to the greatest insight and
that's really the internet.
So the internet really has changed
the face of marketing but maybe not for
the reason you think.
The reason you might be thinking is well.
Selling product.
The internet, selling product over the web
has changed the face of marketing.
And the answer is, you're right, it is
an alternative distribution channel, but
actually, that's not the reason.
Many people may not know this but,
let's take a pause here,
I'll let you think about this to
yourself for two or three seconds.
What fraction of goods in
the United States do you think are sold
over the internet?
So, this is me sitting in front here,
pausing for two or three seconds.
Suppose I told you that it just hit 6%.
Most people think that
number's much larger.
So, from a customer analytics and
a marketing perspective,
the internet isn't so
much a second channel to sell stuff.
It's a way to measure
what you're looking at.
To deliver you ads in
a very contextualized way.
So I know you're on ford.com so
I can send you a car ad.
I know you're on a particular website,
maybe a vacation site, so
now I can now only show
you ads on that site, but
I can re-target you later on with, hey, I
saw you looked at vacations in France and
you're actually, it's ten minutes later or
even two days later and
I'm still targeting you with ads for
vacations in France.
The internet has allowed firms to do
the ultimate in customer analytics.
I always like to think of
the internet as being kind of,
now that you have internet
data as well as purchase data,
if you have those fused together, I almost
think of this as an emergency room doctor
which is you go into an emergency room,
you're bleeding.
What does the doctor do?
He wants to know why you're bleeding.
Well my view is, if you're a firm and
you're manufacturing a product, and
you wanna know what's driving your sales.
I think you wanna know not only
what people are buying, and
that scanner data from the 80s could
tell you, but you wanna know what
products people are considering and
ones that they haven't chosen to buy.
So internet fused together
with purchase data.
If you'd like, take your weblog data and
fuse it together with your supermarket and
store scanner data.
Now you have a very good picture
of advertising and of course,
if you can add the third piece which
is TV, which is starting to come.
Now all of the sudden you
have an integrated view and
the data that you really want on
costumers to do analytics towards them.
So again, from internet data you can
track which pages they've gone to.
Probably, the most important part
is which products they consider,
cuz one of the ways I always like to
think about it is, imagine two scenarios.
One scenario is you have low sales because
people considered your product and
don't like it.
Another one is you have low sales because
people didn't even consider your product.
I'd rather have the latter
than the former.
The former means everyone knows about
your product, they've considered it,
but they don't like it.
The latter means maybe you just need
to spend more money on advertising to
generate awareness without the data on
what products people are considering,
you don't know it.
Targeting ads,
that's kind of the big part.
As a matter of fact,
it's gone through its double hunt cycle.
Back in the late 90s, early 2000s,
banner ads were kind of the rave and
then in the mid 2000s they died
off cuz people said, well,
they don't lead directly to click but
now they're kind of
back cuz people realize they generate
awareness and they generate brand equity.
Next, the internet allows you to link
the past experience so you can track
people through their IP address, through
what their called cookies, their drop
loyalty programs, and the last part, and
this is the part I wanna emphasize to you
cuz part of this module that I've been
talking about is getting the right data.
It's crucial that you find
a way to link your online and
offline data together because a lot of
people now do what's called show-rooming.
They go in the store, the physical store,
they look, and then buy online.
A lot of people look online and
then buy offline.
It's really important that
you link those two together.
Loyalty programs are one way to do it.
There's ways to do it by giving
people discounts and coupons,
by recognizing themselves
when they go in the store.
You gotta link the loyalty
card data to the online data.
Many firms lose the ability to do
modern marketing customer analytics
because they don't properly link their
online and offline data together.
And if you'd like the explosion
of new data is here.
So if you look at all the different names,
Google,
Facebook, Twitter, Yahoo,
Tumblr, Flicker, etc.
It's probably as no surprise.
That all of these companies have great
data that firms wanna know about,
but how about this set of firms?
So for example, Expedia,
what data does Expedia have?
Well, Expedia has every time
someone goes onto their site.
And of course, notice whenever you want
Expedia they either make you log in or
they say sign in as a new customer
cuz they wanna track you over time.
Another example given here is Sirius
XM Radio, the satellite radio company.
Of course,
they know your listening behavior.
The wanna know, I wonder how people who
listen to certain types of music if
they're more likely to cancel
their Sirius XM accounts.
Imagine Hertz, the car rental company,
one of the questions their interested
is what car are you gonna rent next?
Can they upgrade you?
What actually is common to
all of these companies, and
you probably aren't thinking
about all these companies.
All of these companies here make
profits one customer at a time.
They all have individual level
data that they use to monetize.
And they're all applying
customer analytics methods
to try to make more money, and to try
to optimize their marketing against it.
So